Kyle Calabria 							 Springboard Data Science 
12/17/2017									         Capstone One 

Inferential Statistics Analysis

The data set for the problem contains all categorical data other than the target value field which is the purchase amount of a specific product in a given month. Given that the data set only contains one numeric data field, many types of statistical analysis were difficult to conduct or impossible to conduct all together. In order to use statistical analysis techniques requiring multiple numeric data fields, I feature engineered several numeric data fields derived from the numeric and categorical data. These data fields included average purchase amount, number of purchases per user, number of unique categories purchased in by user, number of categories with two or three purchases by user, number of categories with four or five purchases by user and number of categories with six or more purchases by user. I first start by examining the data on a by user basis. 
Users

The data set has 49124 records with an average purchase amount of 9286.17, a standard deviation of  4954.87 and a median purchase amount of 8048.0. The data set does not follow a normal distribution, with a p value of 0.00 on the normalcy test. The cumulative density function below visualizes the data sets diversion from normalcy. From the density mass function above the data set seems to be multi-modal and positively skewed. 
             

There appears to be clustering for purchase amount by user. This might suggest clusters of product that cost similar amounts or popular products i.e. macbook pros and Iphones. 
Based on the top right plot below, the average purchase amount per user seems to be closer to normally distributed than purchase amount based on the histograms, although this distribution also had a 0.0 p value on the normalcy test. The number of products purchased by user (middle left plot)  seems to decline along an exponential curve, suggesting the large majority of user purchase between 1 and 8 products. Two is the most common number of unique product category purchases per user (middle right plot) which seems unusual. This is likely due to the fact that many categories have multiple product category tags, which slightly reduces the descriptive ability of this unique category field. The unique product categories purchased histogram generally follows a downward linear trend with a few anomalies being three categories and eight categories having fewer than expected. The number of categories with two or three purchases follows a steeper downward curve than unique categories, but still seems linear. 






This data set does not scatter plot well due to its lack of numeric data types. The most highly significant trend line appears in the plots of purchase amount and average purchase amount and in the plot of number of purchases and total purchases. There is a positive correlation between a user's purchase amount and their average purchase amount which makes sense as average purchase amount is a function of the user's aggregate purchases. There is also a very high positive correlation between the total purchase amount and the number of purchases. This suggests that the variance in total purchase amount amongst users is greatly in part due to the number of purchases as opposed to a higher average purchase amount. The pearson correlation for this plot was 0.966.
  
 
After taking statistically analyzing the data on a by user basis, I examined the data by grouping the data based on a variety of categorical features i.e. gender, age, occupation, and city category. 
 
Gender
The average purchase amount, average number of purchases and average total purchase amount are marginally higher for males than females, but the total purchase amount and the total number of purchases is roughly 3 times larger by males than females suggesting that males are the primary purchasers on this particular online retailer. The max purchase amount is equal for the genders, but the minimum purchase amount is about 2 times smaller for men than for women. The maximum number of purchases is roughly 25% higher for men and the minimum number of purchases for both purchases is one.
The overlay of average purchase amount per gender shows similar mean purchase amounts for the genders, but roughly three times as many purchases for males than for females. From the violin plot it is clear that males tend to make more purchases at the 15k range. 









Age
The average purchase amount is similar across age ranges, but the total purchase amount and number of purchases varies dramatically with the age range. Age range 26-35 far out purchases all other age ranges and 18-25 and 36-45 have similar total purchase amounts tying for second place. The remaining age ranges purchase far less. The average number of purchases and average total purchase have similar ordering of age ranges in terms of quantity but the quantities are much closer together.





Occupation
Average purchase amount, maximum purchase amount and minimum purchase amount seem to be relatively similar across the occupation. Total purchase amount and total number of purchases have a wide range of amounts and a near identical distribution. Occupations 0, 4 and 7 are the top three purchasing occupations and occupations 8, 18 and 19 are the bottom three purchasers with occupation 8 being significantly below even the second lowest purchaser. Average number of purchases and average total purchase amount follow a very different distribution suggesting that total purchase amount and total number of purchases reflect more on the number of people that fall within each occupation as opposed to the purchasing habits of people in each category. The Average number of purchases and average total purchase amount are more uniformly distributed and reflect more accurately the purchasing characteristics of an occupation. In both of these charts, occupation 8 has the second or third highest amount.



City Category
City Category A has the lowest average purchase amount, total purchase amount and total number of purchases, yet the highest average number of purchases and average total purchase amount. This would suggest a higher spending (more affluent), less populated community.
















